# Collaboration

Today:

* [ ] How to collaborate with software?
* [ ] What is git? And github, gitlab, and other websites?
* [ ] Basic ideas and commands

## Collaboration

## Version Control

> An important problem in program development and maintenance is version
> control, i.e. the task of keeping a software system consisting of many
> versions and configurations well organized. -- [Rcs — a system for version control](https://fatcat.wiki/release/j66jbj3safaclbcoe3a7lujik4) (1985)

A common topic in software development, but increasingly discovered by other fields.

> Many scientists write code as part of their research. Just as experiments are
> logged in laboratory notebooks, it is important to document the code you use
> for analysis. However, a few key problems can arise when iteratively
> developing code that make it difficult to document and track which code
> version was used to create each result. First, you often need to experiment
> with new ideas, such as adding new features to a script or increasing the
> speed of a slow step, but you do not want to risk breaking the currently
> working code. One often-utilized solution is to make a copy of the script
> before making new edits. However, this can quickly become a problem because
> it clutters your file system with uninformative filenames, e.g., `analysis.sh`,
> `analysis_02.sh`, `analysis_03.sh`, etc. It is difficult to remember the
> differences between the versions of the files and, more importantly, which
> version you used to produce specific results, especially if you return to the
> code months later. Second, you will likely share your code with multiple lab
> mates or collaborators, and they may have suggestions on how to improve it.
> If you email the code to multiple people, you will have to manually
> incorporate all the changes each of them sends.

> Fortunately, software engineers have already developed software to manage
> these issues: version control. A version control system (VCS) allows you to
> track the iterative changes you make to your code. Thus, you can experiment
> with new ideas but always have the option to revert to a specific past
> version of the code you used to generate particular results. -- [10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004668](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004668)

## Git

* a tool for [version control](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Version_control)



* widely [adopted](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Git#Adoption)

Usage numbers (estimates):

> In 32% in 2012 (eclipse software foundation survey) used git as primary
> version control system; another survey from Stack Overflow reports: 69.3% in
> 2015, and 87.2% in 2018.

For many projects, the whole industry shifted from CVS and subversion
(centralized systems) to git (decentralized).

## GitHub, GitLab, SourceHut, and others

## How it works
